Welcome to remove or the requirements to carry
and display a license, whether in paper or electronic form.
This is long overdue
and removes a significant cost to user and the government.
We also welcome the continuation
of the privacy regime from the existing legislation.
This has proven and effective
and will help provide public confidence in the scheme.
Our concerns, however, with the bill relate to
where it does not realize the full potential
that Universal EA can bring to New Zealand
or where it does not fully follow through
with the policy intent.
And specifically, there are a few areas I'd like
to touch on share versus the ton is the alternative payment
scheme provision that currently is exists
and it's been modified by this bill
to extend its availability.
We believe this is a critical mechanism
for achieving real flexibility and re
and cost reductions to help consumers pay for r
Achieving genuine cost savings
for consumers means moving away from reliance on the n NCTs
current legacy solutions for day-to-day service delivery.
In part four of our submission,
we set out our thought this in more detail,
but there are three points I'd like to highlight today.
First, the process of getting our alternative payment system
considered is entirely discretionary.
The approval pathway and responsibilities officials are not
clearly set out seeking the proposed regulations
for setting the administrative fees is based on the work
that our provider does, where it should be based on the work
that NCTA a's system will do.
That is the regulation should only cover NCTA a's cost
recovery and it should not govern our private
sector costs and fees.
And third refunding RU related
to offroad travel is important, is important to fairness
and legitimacy of the system.
However, it still creates some money go round
and administrative compliance costs.
We ask that you consider whether the law can adequately
allow for a trade off
between road users being netted out under the a PS
before tax is paid.
This will allow a move towards more of a postpaid system
for ruck to make it administratively more convenient
and simple for road users.
A separate concern we have is in relation to the role
of MCTA as a R retailer.
Under the bill Minister Bishop indicated a key legislative
change was including separating NCTA a's role
as both regulator
and retailer to foster fear of competition.
The priority work for nct, A as part of these changes was
to upgrade their systems to support the enforcement in a
digital environment.
The proposed section 44 of the bill seems
to work in the opposite direction,
maintaining the NCTA a's role as a retailer.
Instead of leaving room for the private sector,
it retains the current structural potential for conflicts
of interest and potentially distracts from the critical work
that nnc TA is being asked to do.
An additional product to raise is the requirement for
providers like eero to have to reapply
for approval under the new bill.
There are two scenarios that we think are important here.
First, if our R provider wanted to introduce a new service
and take advantage of new flexibility bill,
then they should go through an approval
process under the bill.
However, if a service provider is already providing an under
contract NCTA and meets the requirements
of both the existing and proposed law,
and we have in place auditing
and contractual safeguards already in place,
we don't do not believe re-approval should be necessary
for existing providers in the market.
And we set out our thoughts that again, in this submission.
To conclude, I'd like to reiterate
that we strongly support this bill,
which signals the most significant transformation
of ER's oh, sorry,
of New Zealand's road funding landscape in over two decades.
And we believe the framework is workable
and we'll be grateful to answer any questions
or explore in further detail that this committee would like
to go into, particularly over any technical aspects
that you may have questions on.
Right. Sorry,
my about three and a half minutes left.
First question there I can see from Tan.
Sorry, I've now finally got the,
the computer sorted, so, right.
Uh, thank you Mr. Chair.
Um, thank you gentlemen for your submission.
You also sort of touch on the suitability of NZTA
as a ruck provider.
Uh, and I think what you're stating there is
that in the circumstance
where effectively NCTA would be the provider of last resort
that you would be comfortable with that, is
that the only sort of provision that you're referring
to in terms of the suitability
of the agency to undertake that work?
Largely correct. Um, we do believe that the entity, entity
as provided life report may step in, uh,
and that's the main concern we have
raised in our submission.
I don't believe there's any specific other provisions in the
Bill Peter that you are consumed of NTTS provision
as a provider of last resort.
Uh, no. It's, it's more of a presumption in section 44
that they need to be there from the get go.
I mean, obviously they are already there, you know,
and they could actually be treated
as an existing provider as well.
So again, special provision, um, to just put them in, uh,
seems unnecessary in that regard.
But if you think about it,
counter services are actually already being delivered in a
slightly cheaper fashion by other parties as well.
So there's duplication in their, uh,
in their current operations as well.
So it's more like the need
for last resort provider should probably be demonstrated,
um, at some point
through evaluation rather than just locking them in in
that role from the get go.
Correct. And the presumption
of having them involved is our key concern.
Jonathan, how are we going ques, uh, time-wise?
Uh, two minutes left. Two minutes go. Okay. Other questions?
Uh, team. So can I just ask you
one, uh, in terms of, uh, the technological capability,
I mean that you gave us your assessment that you, that, uh,
erodes the head of the head of the game internationally,
Correct.
Uh, is how, how many other, you know, when you look
around the world, I mean, how many other, uh,
organizations are, you know,
within the same sort of ballpark as you?
Well, there's a number of, um, organizations out there,
chair who are looking at technology in the space.
And in New Zealand alone,
you've got 2, 2, 3 other providers, providers, technology,
which is great to see other kiwi companies in the
space globally.
There's been move in the US
and elsewhere to also track light vehicles
for specific state-based tolling and road charger systems.
So you do have oversee providers as well
who can come into this market
and provide strong technology for New Zealand consumers.
Right. No, thank you. Okay.
I don't see any other, uh, Tony, is that you hand?
There is. Okay. You go Andy.
Um, just with time, one of the concerns I have with, um,
some of these costs are the admin costs that are, are,
are born by applicants when it comes
to R and those sorts of things.
Um, you and your submission touch on the credit card,
uh, sort of fee component.
Do you just want to double down on, on what you're asking
for there in terms of consistency,
Uh, on that one?
Um, at the moment,
the way it works is we incur costs the merchant fees for,
uh, credit card providers and we pass those on to consumers.
Given the cost we've incurred, uh, NCTA under its, uh,
provision of ruck licenses does not pass those costs on.
So it's an inequitable playing field around the cost side.
What we'd like to see, again at the competitive market is
that we are trying to provide great rux services,
the lowest possible cost,
and if we've got a protection for government agency not
to pass this cost on it, sort
of uneven to playing field there.
So that's where we are focusing on our concerns raised
Helpful. Thank you.
Just to be precise, the NZTA does spread the cost
of merchant fees across all of its transactions,
which is consistent with the direction of the laws going,
but they spread across all of the transactions
that go through their systems.
So they serve 30% of US transactions themselves, but 100%.
So including all of the transactions we manage mm-hmm.
Are recovering the cost
of the credit card merchant fees associated with that 30%
that go through their system.
So we are effectively subsidizing them.
Um, well, our customers are subsidizing potentially their
competitors and everybody else, so
that's, but just available.
That's very helpful. Look, thank you
and thank you for the work that you do.
Thank you chair. Thank you. Committee.
Right. Um, Jonathan, next up we've got Max Marshall.
Yep. He'll be coming through now.
And, uh, Jonathan, while, while we're waiting, um,
it's Jacob Sorenson and the aa uh, ready.
Uh, we don't have Jacob in the waiting room yet,
but we do have the aa
Cool. Okay. Right. Well,
if Jacob's not there, fact, uh,
I think we'll go straight to the AA
because, uh, that's, we're five minutes
behind already, unfortunately.
Um, okay. Right, max.
All right. Uh, max, um, you know, you know the drill.
We've got you down for five minutes. Yep.
Um, I'll give you a call with, uh, one to go.
Um, if you don't, uh, leave time for questions,
you can take your submission as read,
but, uh, things you wanna highlight, uh,
your time starts now.
Hi. Um, thank you. Um, thank you. Um, Mr. Chair.
Thank, um, thank you. Um, well, um, thank you panelists.
Um, thank, thank for you for the opportunity to speak.
I wish to say that I see this issue of road funding
as it has been configured between trade off,
between fuel taxes and local authority.
Contribution is mistaken is not a question of who
uses the road, but of how the burden is shared
between the group groups involved.
Um, there were three main main points of the 1998 white,
white paper draft, draft bill.
The, and it was concerned with not creating
an equitable burden for any group.
I believe that this is the, the only issue
at stake here, the two two main points of the,
of the paper, a change in one, a change in structure
with 48 roading authorities amalgamating the existing
district council roading network plus additional one,
an additional one for transit New Zealand.
The roading, um, authority
and TNZ are, are to be, um, were
to be called public roading companies.
Prcs a change in governance.
Two, a change in governance
where the PRCS being run essentially as corporations
with roading and pricing decisions being made only on
technical grounds.
The white paper suggests, um, eight prcs.
I believe we only need one tolling, again,
is moving towards a privatization MO model.
In my supplementary no dimension Australians
toll system, I'm talking about Melbourne
and why it dislike the society.
It creates through principally the disenfranchisement
of this, um, of the citizens.
I support an earmark tax.
And second point, I do not support a competitive market
for private IUC providers
to issue licenses and collect charges.
Um, we have seen car park spaces being managed
by third parties, uh,
usually a a financialized business unit.
I can see the same problem, uh, of this
predatory business model for extracting money arising.
Instead, I want to maintain roading as a public utility
and any attempt to tax people with user payers as an enma
to this treasury.
A great fan of non-discriminatory taxes,
treasury receives considerably more revenue than from
motorists than their spending on roads.
Their surplus was around 700 million in 1998.
This fiscal stance is purely ideological.
Instead, I'm in favor of giving the ability
of the PRC to you. Got two
Minutes left, max, Effectively tax treasury.
Um, the corporatized governance structure of PRCS
prevents political interference from, from local authorities
around pricing and investment arrangements.
One of the tools I prefer for solving congestion would be
to talk to regional authorities of Auckland
and Wellington to identify a practical solution.
Giving them no preconditions other than the tax
that goes into the consolidated fund is untouchable.
And that precondition for any local solution must not be the
to the detriment of other regions.
What I'm opposed to is any con covert
attempt to increase revenue.
Bad lawmaking is law that has had,
that has another hidden purpose other than the one stated
the connection between the citizen with the benefit
of public goods, including roads.
Ca I cannot state more clearly.
Perhaps the most important key I want to leave you
with is having one single PRC being run essentially
as a corporation, that this is the best model for roading
and pricing decisions being made only,
only made on technical grounds.
And I argue the most simplest solution is, is often the best
That you're done, max.
Yep. Thank you. We've got about 35 seconds left.
Uh, any questions, uh, colleagues
Briefly, Mr. Chair?
Uh, Simon, Thank you. Thank you Max.
Um, max, do you think it's fair that, uh, taxpayers
who don't use the roads have to subsidize road users?
And isn't it more fair that those who use the roads more,
whether they're heavy trucks, uh,
or people who uh, travel more kilometers
pay their fair share?
Um, no, I, no, I, no, I don't.
Um, I believe, I don't believe, um, that, um,
that, that, that, that's more, um,
that's, that's more fair.
I believe that I'm influenced very much by Joel.
Um, um, Joel Rolston's, um, his theory of JU justice,
and I feel as though I, I feel as though, um,
there is a, this, um, system has to be an, an,
an equitable, um, one.
What, one person? No, no,
No, no, no. We, we type
Simon time
and um, max time is, so we are going to,
we're gonna gonna stop it there and move on.
I'm sorry, but thank you Max. Really appreciate it.
Jonathan, have we got, uh, Jacob Sorenson there
or are we going straight to the aa?
Uh, we don't, but we've got AA ready to go.
Okay. Okay. So we're going to the aa Thank you.
We've got Martin and Sarah there.
Yeah. Welcome. Lovely to see you there.
Um, you know, the, the usual deal, so we've got 10 minutes.
You can take your submission as read. Yep.
Uh, I'll give you a call with Forti Go,
and, um, your time starts now.
Thank you. Good morning.
And, and thanks for the opportunity
to speak to the A'S submission.
Um, as you're aware, um, my name's Martin Glenn,
I'm the AAA's policy director,
and with me is Sarah Gid, who's a senior advisor in the aa.
The AA has a strong interest in both road user charges in
tolling, both in terms of the cost they impose on not trust,
and how the money they raise
is invested in the transport system.
I'm going to outline our views on the Bills R provisions,
and then give you a high level overview on our,
of our positions on the tolling provisions.
Sarah will then set out the three changes
to the tolling provisions we'd most like to see.
So starting with road user charging,
we are pleased the bill is making it easier for users
to pay road user charges,
and it makes good sense to remove barriers
to a future transition of all vehicles to road user charges.
When the time is right. We support the Bills amendments.
We've taken the opportunity to highlight our two concerns,
uh, two key concerns with the transition as it stands.
Um, and I think one of those has already been touched on,
so they are briefly compliance and administration fees.
I'm very happy to go into those in more detail if
that's useful, but I appreciate they'll be
beyond the scope of the current bill.
Turning to tolling, the AA supports tolling to,
to help fund new roads.
Charging motorists who benefit from a new road is consistent
with the user pays principles
that underpin the land transport funding system.
Tolling can make good sense when will help
to deliver a new road earlier than would be
the case without tolling.
But not every new road should be to tolling.
A road will almost always reduce its benefits
because fewer people will use it if they have to pay a toll.
Ensure each road needs to be assessed
for tolling on its merits.
We support many of the bills tolling provisions,
however, we, we are concerned
that some provisions break the link between those
who will be acquired to pay a toll
and those who will benefit from the new road.
Maintaining that link is fundamental
to the user pays principles
of the land transport fund funding system
to ensuring tolling is fair and appropriate,
and most importantly, to public acceptability for tolling.
We're also concerned
that the bill does not require any consideration of impact
that toll prices will have on a roads benefits.
Toll prices should strike the right balance
between revenue goals and economic and safety benefits.
Right. I'm gonna hand over to Sierra now to speak
to the most important amendments the AA is putting forward
to address these concerns.
So our top concern is with the provisions
that expand when an existing road can be told,
this is a really significant change
and it's yet to be seen if the public will support it.
A recent AI member survey found that just 25%
of respondents felt that it would be fair
to toll an existing road,
even if motorists benefit from a new road.
At best, there are only tenuous links
between the grounds the bill provides
for tolling an existing road,
and the user pays and benefits principle.
The bill enables an existing road
to be told if it's efficiency has been enhanced
by the construction of a new road on the same corridor.
Even if the efficiency enhancement doesn't provide a benefit
to those who use the road, it also allows an existing road
to be told if it's efficiency, will be enhanced
by the construction of a new road,
meaning a toll could be put on an existing road years
before a new road is even built.
And lastly, it enables an existing road to be told
where its users benefit from a new road,
but benefit is not defined.
So it leaves a completely up to the minister to decide
what constitutes a benefit.
The a's position is that legislation should only allow
for tolling on an existing road if users of
that road are significantly better off from the construction
of a new road on the same corridor,
even if they don't use this new road.
And our view is that the only way road users can be
significantly better off is if they get a decent
improvement in travel times.
The bill needs to be amended
to only allow tolling on an existing road
where its users gain a travel time benefit from the
construction of a new road on the same
corridor on toll price.
The second thing we'd like to highlight relates
to the matters the minister is required
to take into account when determining toll prices.
The bill identifies three things, the road's,
revenue potential, the benefits of tolling to users
of the road, and the effects
that the toll would have on the wider road network.
We support those, but the minister should also be required
to consider the impact
that the toll will have on the road's,
economic and safety benefits.
This is important because as Martin mentioned,
tolling a road will mean fewer vehicles use it,
which reduces the benefits the road provides.
The higher the toll, the more motorists who will avoid it,
including this amendment would mean
that the minister is required to consider the full range
of pros and cons of the proposed toll
when setting the toll price.
And the final thing we'd like
to highlight is about the provisions relating
to private companies who may operate toll roads.
The AA is open to the private sector tolling and,
and accepts that private companies will need
to make a commercial return on investment, which will need
to be recovered from toll revenue.
Our concern is with the provision that enables an RCA, so
that's NZTA or, or a council to apply the funds
that it has received as part of an agreement
with the private toll operator to any road,
as the private toll operator will be reliant on toll
revenue to recoup those funds.
This effectively means motorists will be paying a toll on
one road to fund another road, potentially in another part
of the region or even another part of the country.
This completely undermines the user
pays principles of tolling.
The bill needs to be amended to require an RCA
to use any funds it receives from a private toll operator
for the road the private toll operator will be
collecting toll revenue from.
So that's it for the matters that we specifically would like
to highlight, but we're very happy to answer any questions.
Okay. We'll make the questions quick and to the point.
Um, we've got, uh, we've got three and a bit minutes left.
Uh, Julianne, then Simon, and I've got one
Jora. Thanks for your submission.
You've mentioned, um, the principles
of the land transport funding system being user pays.
Um, would the AA acknowledge
that it hasn't actually been user pays ever
because a substantial portion
of road funding hasn't come from road users in the form
of 50% of local road funding
and, uh, there's been substantially more crown investment
than, um, NLTF investment in recent years.
I, I, I, I, I think that's, um, that's the case.
It's presumably one of the reasons why, uh,
we considering this, this bill's being considered
because of the, the, the need for, for, for more revenue,
absolutely recount revenue,
but also the expenditure, a pure user pay system.
Of course, everything would go into roading
and we don't, our land transport system isn't, isn't like
that in terms of how the money's collected off
motorists is allocated.
Um, one other question.
You talked about benefits being lower.
If, uh, tolling is put in place, I realize that's, um,
been the case because we've only looked at cases
for tolling roads, one,
one-off like transmission golley, for example.
Um, but surely part of what this bill's trying to address is
that if you had more direct charging
for all the roads in an area,
then there would be a more optimal use
of the roads that exist.
So, um, it's not the case
and in some cases,
fewer vehicles using the road is the benefit.
That's how you get the time. Travel benefits,
Um, travel Time, sorry,
That that's probably not our reading of the ball.
We see it as a bolt to enhance the, the tolling provisions,
um, uh, in, in the existing act.
And they're focused on, on, on kind of individual corridors.
And I think that's, that's almost stepping into time
of use charging when you're talking about
tolling all the existing roads.
Our, our concern, and we've got, um, you know, some,
some research to, to kind of to back this up, is that some
of the big four lane highways, which most
of these things have been named about, they're much safer
and they, you know, it's not, when I say the economic
benefits includes the safety benefits they have, um,
really delivered some quite impressive reductions in in,
in Destin serious injuries.
All we're asking is that the economic
and safety benefits of the road be
considered in setting the toll price.
And we think, we think that's really important given the
significant investment that's on the cards.
Simon. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, so just on a tolling revenue being applied to
existing roads, uh, are you aware that the design life
of New Zealand road pavements is 25 years
and that surfacing like asphalt somewhere between 12 to 15?
So wouldn't it be logical
that if roads are being reconstructed, essentially
a completely renewed down to the subgrade, that uh,
a toll could reasonably be collected?
'cause it is all new material and new construction?
Uh, the, the position, um, uh, has, has been
and always will be, um,
that the first call on user charger should be
to maintain the existing network.
That's what we see the purpose of it.
Um, I haven't seen anything in the bill
that proposes changing that principle.
So we think that's where the money has to go to first.
That and safety and,
and keeping the existing system running in the form of,
Okay, well, I mean that, that's interesting.
But my, my question was around, um, CapEx renewals,
which are essentially building a new road from the subgrade
up, which is what you do every 25 years.
So in an existing corridor where large sections
of a road, you know, many kilometers at a time
around the state highway network are being renewed.
Uh, wouldn't it be only fair to charge users
for the benefit of a new sub
of a new pavement and asphalt service?
I mean, it's new, right?
Rebels are happening, um, you know,
all over the place at different times.
We see that as a core element
to the existing system keeping existing network over from
our view, tolling, it is about extra,
it's about getting new roads and, and,
and we've, we've set out our,
our position on the narrow grounds in which it would be
appropriate to, to total an existing road under that, under
that framework. Okay.
So just to clarify, new routes versus new roads,
when you're talking about new roads you're talking about, I
Think we got that one. Yeah,
yeah, yeah, yeah.
Um, that would suggest there were no, um, no earthworks
or none, none of that other sort of stuff required.
Uh, two Simon, I'm not one very quick one.
I'm gonna give myself lecture one very quick one.
Um, that's, you argued that, uh, there needed to be a, um,
a benefit to use an existing road from building a new one.
Any existing road that is congested by definition, um,
building a new road is gonna take congestion away from that.
Now, we heard the, um, officials say, well,
actually the intention is that a corridor actually means
effectively in the same place, not parallel.
Um, do, do you have a, an issue that we need to type
to define that more tightly?
So we're quite clear that it's not merely
that you're building a a new road
and that takes congestion off the existing road,
because that's almost by definition gonna happen.
There's some very kind of, uh, conation, slightly con, uh,
confusing rules in, in the, um, um, bill, I think about, um,
what, what constitutes a corridor.
We are seeing the corridor, meaning a new road is built
further along the line.
Um, it may benefit users
of the existing road if the traffic jam already banks up,
as you say, heavily into existing road.
But we'd wanna see empiric for that.
We'd want just like, just like we get with a new road that
what are the travel time savings gonna be
that motorists get a, if they use a new road
and replace in exchange for the toll,
we'd wanna see something similar on the existing road.
Okay. So what a corridor is,
becomes important, uh, definition.
Um, look, thank you. Our time is up, so we really appreciate
that and thanks for the work you put in
and all the work you do.
Thank you. Thank you. Right, Jonathan,
we better get transporting New Zealand up.
Uh, yep, they're in the zoom. Ready to go.
Brilliant. Welcome. Uh, we've got Dom, mark, and Billy.
Is that right?
Yes, that's right. Okay. Look, welcome.
Good to see you here. Um, you know, the,
the usual drill, we've got 10 minutes.
I'll get the clock started now.
I'll give you a call with five to go if, uh, four to go.
Sorry. Um, if you're still talking
and we, uh, haven't got questions so away in your time,
Uh, good morning committee,
but we appreciate the opportunity to speak to this bill.
It does have significant implications
for the road freight industry and our 1100 member companies.
A successful transition
to Universal Electronic Road user charges
and having successful tolling schemes are two really
important issues for our membership
and for the wider transport system.
Um, let's remember, you know, typically
road freight vehicles are only 10% of any traffic stream.
I'm joined by team members, Billy Clemons
and Mark's doctor, who will, um, help present this and,
and tech questions look, firstly,
transporting New Zealand is supportive
of the bill's provisions relating to the RU transition.
Um, the current system has been
configured for commercial use.
Um, its vehicles over six ton
for a considerable period of time.
And I think by and large it's worked pretty well.
The proposed changes will allow the system
to become more consumer friendly
and lay the ground for that universal transition.
Uh, we'll be reaching out to officials
directly on our technical queries on that.
Um, in terms of, uh, a couple of concerns we've got, um,
I'm gonna hand over to our head of policy
and advocacy, Billy Clements to speak to that.
Yeah. Uh, KDA committee members look,
transport New Zealand's concerned, two key elements
of the bill's proposed holding reforms.
Um, so first of all, just to state TN Z's position,
we've been an outspoken supporter of road tolling.
I think over the last sort of 18 months
through the last several tolling consultations have probably
been one of the, uh, transport associations who've spoken
out most vocally in favor with the exception of Manu two ua,
um, on concerns that was effectively an existing
road or a replacement.
And we've actually completed industry-wide surveying
to confirm this positive mandate that we have
for the existing system.
Um, however, we are concerned
that the bills current provisions relating to, as, uh,
you've heard from the aa, the very broadly defined corridor
tolling provisions
and also mandating heavy vehicle, uh,
road toll use will undermine industry support
for tolling schemes
and will increase freight business, um, freight costs
for businesses and consumers.
And, uh, we've recommended in our submission
that those two particular provisions be
removed from the bill.
Uh, however, in the alternative, in terms
of mitigating those impacts on the supply chain,
on on freight, we've made a recommendation
that the committee could consider in relation
to mandating a heavy vehicle toll road use,
that those heavy vehicle tolls would be capped at a maximum
toll of three times the light vehicle rate.
And it's effectively to acknowledge that, uh,
if heavy vehicles were compelled to use toll route,
that NZTA would have the ability hypothetically
to ratchet up toll rates, uh, to whatever, uh,
to whatever levels, uh, were signed off.
And, uh, our members would, uh, be forced in that situation
to pass that cost on.
Um, and secondly, uh, we'd recommend that the to
corridor tolling provision be limited to specific scenarios
actually contemplated in, uh, the, uh,
regulatory impact statement where situations
where lanes are existing to an existing corridor road
or an extension is made
to an expressway a clear benefit to road users.
We'll certainly be open to that submission made by aa, um,
regarding additional, uh, additional clarification
around the definition of corridor tolling being helpful.
Uh, thank you very much.
Thank you. That's very, uh, very quick.
Um, and to the point, um, um, questions colleagues, Simon.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um, thanks.
Great submission and just certainly acknowledge transporting
New Zealand support for, uh, the concepts
that we've discussed over quite a few years.
Um, I'm wondering just in terms of how we arrive at a,
at an equitable toll rate for heavies, um,
you've talked about three times,
like vehicle rate could be about right.
Would it make not make more sense just
to do the pavement modeling, um, that pavement engineers,
design engineers use every day to work out, uh, exactly, uh,
how much impact the heavies have on a particular route,
whether it's concrete road, whether it's asphalt,
structural, asphalt, and simply work out on a case
by case basis, what
that cost recovery is plus a margin for admin?
Would that, I mean, all the data's there, right?
Wouldn't it that just be a, a fair way to do it?
I, I think the cost allocation model,
which has been in place for a long,
long time already does that.
Okay. And
so I'm not sure there'd be a lot more benefit, uh,
and trying to change that.
I mean, clearly there are some technical arguments about
whether the fourth power law is is right or not.
And I think that would be a risk that you try
and review the can and, uh, you,
you can't get agreement on it.
Right. I think it's as good as it's gonna get.
Okay, thanks.
Certainly, if I could just add to that one,
one submission on a broader issue
of tolling consultations is that we find that
nz we certainly encourage N-N-Z-T-A to put that analysis
and advice out there in terms
of explaining that to our membership.
We've said that previously
that tolling consultations don't provide enough information
for detailed submissions
from industry and from other groups.
So certainly that is a wider point we'd be very open to.
Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, thank you gentlemen,
and thank you for, um, starting your submission
with the position around where you sit with tolling
and ATU replacement obviously is, uh, you know, a,
a position that you'd taken
and it makes no sense that the government sought
to put a toll on that stretch of road.
But when we are looking around the inability
for heavy vehicles to utilize, um, alternative routes
where there is a toll, I mean,
if we think about the Saddle Road in
that particular context, it's highly unlikely
that heavy vehicles would opt to use the saddle road over a,
a stretch alternative that was was told.
So is the crux of the issue there simply you saying that,
um, providers are best placed to make decisions around
what is best for the job
that they're undertaking at the time?
Yeah. Oh, absolutely.
And just to say, um, yeah,
and I, I was speaking to a large member of ours who operates
around the, the central North Island recently,
who was pointing out that in, in their case, they know
that using toll roads makes sense.
They know that cost of running
that vehicle can sit up at $250 an hour
for a truck trailer unit.
So, um, the concerns would be around,
there will be limited circumstances in which heavy vehicles
do want to use those roads.
And I think it's been pointed out in advice on this bill
that it is a distinct minority of times the issues around
act, um, around good fatigue management, good rest stops.
And members quite often point out,
particularly on these new toll roads,
which focused on fast movement,
aren't appropriate places to pull over.
If you've been waiting at port of toga for a booking for,
and you've had to, to you know, wait a particular amount
of time and you are about to hit your five
and a half hours, you want to be able
to pull over in the best space to rest, refresh yourself.
And I think that was what our members said is,
for the most part, it's not a personal preference thing.
Truck drivers don't go the scenic route 'cause they like it.
Um, they're making sensible decisions, making decision,
and as, as we say, we'd convinced that truck drivers
and their businesses are in the
best position to make that call.
Question from me then. And, uh, also
to echo tan's point about the, uh, mano tower, um, highway,
uh, we agree with that, um, position that he's,
uh, enunciated.
Um, the, just in terms of the, surely the, the best place,
if, if the concern is that there are some roads which, um,
we don't really want heavy vehicles on,
heavy freight vehicles on,
shouldn't we be identifying those roads?
I mean, there are, you know, plenty of roads
around the country which are, um, you know,
have weight limits and so on, on them.
Shouldn't we be doing that rather than having this, uh, sort
of blanket push to say you must use toll
roads where those exist?
Yeah, and, and I think I'm just fine.
I think there's a reference in our submission
to a particular provision in the Land Transport Act
that refers to when, when roads are unsafe
or manifesting inappropriate for heavy vehicles,
there are sort of bylaw abilities or restrictions
and, um, we'd be interested, perhaps officials might be able
to advise on whether that would be a more productive, uh,
more efficient way of utilizing the existing tools
that we have, uh, rather than, uh, putting, putting it
through in, in a tolling, uh, in a tolling scheme.
Yeah, it's, it's paragraph 20 of our submission
and the Land Transport Act, um, has the ability
for local authorities to make bylaws banning, um,
vehicles from, from, uh, roads.
Yep. No, thank you for that.
I don't see any other questions.
So look, thank you very much.
Really appreciate the, uh, uh, the submission
and, um, you know, enjoy the rest of the day.
Thanks for your submission. Thanks team. Thank
You. Okay, we've
now got, uh, rewiring ra,
Jonathan, are they in, in the Zoom?
Uh, yep, we've got Dawn here.
Okay. And can we just check while we're there, um, uh,
then we've got Ra, um, rack on Rails,
driver Electric, infrastructure New Zealand.
Are any of them sitting waiting as well?
Uh, yep, we've got Rock on Rails ready to go.
We don't have Drive Electric.
Okay. No, that's okay. We,
we we're, uh, in good shape then.
Right. Okay. So is it at,
Um, no, it's actually Jo,
my colleague Josh Ellison is joining me.
Okay. From Rewiring has his, um, he should be waiting
to join and he was gonna present to our submission.
Have we got him there, Jonathan?
Yes. Yep. Just coming through now.
Right. I,
I had the link to, uh, to view the meeting
but not to present at the meeting meeting, so, um,
Oh, good. Well, you're, you're in
now. Okay, Josh, look, um,
we've got you down for 10 minutes.
You can take your submission as read.
We do like you to highlight the things
that you most want to focus on.
Uh, we also like asking questions, so I'll give you a call
with about four minutes to go if you are still speaking,
um, and your time starts now.
Thank you very much and thank you for your time today.
Committee. Uh, my name is Josh Ellison.
I lead research at Rewiring roa.
My colleague, Dawn, uh, is here as well,
who leads our vehicle sector engagement.
Rewiring is a fiercely independent nonprofit, a think
and do tank, if you will, funded by New Zealand philanthropy
to represent the interest
of everyday New Zealanders in our energy future.
Our goal is to build an energy system with lower bills,
lower emissions, and higher resilience.
We are a data led organization.
We love to be wrong, true to the scientific method of trying
to prove your own hypothesis wrong,
to continually see the world more
illuminated than ever before.
I say this as what as what we were about to go
through on Rux may be different
to what you thought was the case.
We support a move to universal rux
as it will remove an inaccurate market distortion in vehicle
economics and lead New Zealand
towards a better energy future.
To state what is perhaps the obvious diesel vehicles
and electric vehicles are charged road user charger trucks
today at a rate of $76 for every 1000 kilometers they drive
for petrol vehicles, fuel excise is assumingly meant
to recover a similar amount.
However, it does not.
This creates an artificial distortion in vehicle market
economics, which does not serve the future of New Zealand
to recover $76 over 1000 kilometers at a rate
of 77.40 cents per liter of fuel excise.
A petrol car would need to have an efficiency
of about 9.8 liters of fuel consumed.
For every 100 kilometers it drives,
that's the point at which it'll pay about the same
as an electric or diesel car.
The question must then be asked
of the cars New Zealand has in its fleet
and the cars we buy new today, how efficient are they
and how much do they pay
of the reported fuel economies in our existing fleet
of petrol vehicles that pay fuel excise Today, only about 9%
of the vehicles are above this 9.8 liter threshold, which is
to say that on reported efficiency numbers about 91%
of the petrol car fleet today underpay
on their road user tax.
Now it's worth noting at this point
that manufacturer reported efficiency figures are often
overly ambitious, shall we say,
which means the tipping point
may be somewhat lower than this.
If we assume vehicles are 20% less efficient than
manufacturers report them, it's still about three quarters
of the fleet underpaying
of the top 15 selling petrol vehicles last year.
Zero of those vehicles had an efficiency, uh,
that would make them pay their fair
share in road use charges.
On average, that efficiency
of new petrol vehicles sold was 5.9
liters per a hundred kilometers.
To put this into some quick real world perspective,
a Toyota RAV4 hybrid, one
of New Zealand's most popular new cars,
has an efficiency according to Toyota
of five liters per a hundred kilometers.
With that consumption for every 1000 kilometers it drives,
it pays about $39 in fuel excise in contrast
to a similarly sized Toyota Electric SUV,
which pays $76 nearly double what the hybrid pays
to drive the same distance in that road use tax.
We've heard from individuals, fleet buyers,
and Uber drivers alike about this distortion.
This applies to secondhand vehicles too.
The new Toyota Yaris hybrid, previously known
as the Aqua we get secondhand, would pay about $24
for every thousand kilometers a similarly size Nissan Nissan
Leaf pays $76.
These differences are, are not based on the cost of energy.
This is an artificial distortion caused
by the fuel excise methodology,
a distortion which has not served the future
of New Zealand's economic fuel, security,
or resilience interests.
The broader context here is also illuminating New Zealand
spends about $15 billion at the year, uh,
per year at the pump buying petrol
and diesel all imported from foreign nations
and subject to disruption,
MBS own report into our nation's fuel security con concluded
that it would be five times cheaper
and twice as useful for fuel security of the nation
to electrify more of the vehicle fleet than would be
to restart the Mar point oil refinery.
As we launch into a world where vehicles can back up homes,
businesses, and farms, with vehicle
to grid technology providing more
and easier access to energy resilience than we've ever had
before, the benefits to New Zealand could be immense.
In addition to the economic savings available,
you must then ask yourself why in a country
with no oil industry that imports almost all of its, uh,
fossil fuels from foreign nations which produce minimal jobs
locally, why put the finger on the scales on behalf
of the fossil fuel industry?
Who does it help? We don't have a car manufacturing sector
to attempt to protect like the US does,
and we are not an oil magnate To quote Ford,
CEO Jim Farley on Chinese electric vehicles, quote,
it's the most humbling thing I have ever seen.
The cost, the quality of the vehicles is far superior
to what I see in the west.
The European automakers are catching up to even Toyota
and Subaru are bringing more of eastern market this year.
After false dreams of hydrogen have been shown
to have no future in light vehicles.
A significant portion of the cost
of any product is the energy that goes into making it.
And we could run our economy with far more productivity,
saving billions every year
by running on our own self-reliant electricity flowing
through more efficient and reliable electric machines.
There is no reason the scale should be tipped towards
inefficient, expensive to run vehicles
that do not serve our future.
It is our recommendation that the committee proceeds
with a universal ruck approach
and that overarchingly as a nation,
we start building an energy future to benefit our people.
First time is of the essence.
Every day New Zealand businesses
and homes invest in vehicles that will last in our economy
for 20 years, including large fleets.
Some today, which are looking at shifting back
to hybrids from electric vehicles
so they can pay less road tax
while deciding on organizing the future of Rux.
Our current system pushes towards locking us into vehicles
that will be more expensive to run
and maintain for all of New Zealand
and will just need to be replaced again
to get to zero emissions.
We recommend that the introduction
of universal rucks is accelerated
to minimize the negative impacts
of this market distortion occurring today,
and that there are even faster short-term remedies
to ensure the vehicles New Zealand people invest in now are
of their and the NA nation's long-term interest.
And that is electric. Thank you for your time
and I'll take any questions we have the time for.
That's great, Josh. Thank you very much
and uh, very illuminating.
Um, we've got just under four minutes, so Simon,
Thank you Mr. Chair.
Quickly look up appreciate, um, Josh,
the point you make, uh, about the, the difference between,
uh, what, uh, ev drivers versus hybrids and
and petrol diesel vehicles pay.
Um, but isn't the case here.
We're trying to solve a larger problem, which is that,
you know, we have a huge deficit
between what's collected from road using cha road user
charges, fuel, exercise duty.
It's about 14, uh, billion over the, um,
over the three year, um, uh, GPS transport GPS.
And unless we can find a way to close the gap
between the 14 billion we collect
and the 32 billion we spend over that period,
uh, we're kind of stuffed.
Um, our roads are doomed.
So, uh, isn't it the case
that this is just an important step to resolving that?
I think, uh, my comments are directly, uh, representative
of the, the road user charge approach, um,
and not representative of the broader
money needed to be recovered.
Um, but in this specific context, um, for example, with a
around 90% of the petrol fleet currently underpaying, um,
I think it would create, uh, more recovery in that context.
That's very, very clear. Uh, no other questions.
Okay, uh, Jonathan, just to check, we get,
we we will get all those, um, the, the numbers, et cetera.
I know that many were in your submission anyway,
but, uh, the numbers that, um, uh, Josh has just,
uh, um, shared with us.
Great. Cool. Brilliant. Thank you Josh.
Really appreciate, thanks for all the work you do
and, um, some very pointed points.
Thank you very much. Cool.
Okay. Right, we are now with, uh, um,
ruck on rails.
Awesome. Thank you. Adam. Is that right? Yeah.
Adam, welcome. Adam, we've got you down for 10 minutes.
Thank you. Um, thank you.
We'll give you a call with before go take your submission
to this red, but if you wanna highlight some things, uh,
that you particularly want to talk about, that's great
when your time starts now. Awesome.
Well thank you for the opportunity to speak today.
Uh, just a little bit of background.
So my name is Adam Johnston.
I'm 22 years old based in Dunedin, uh,
and I'm a co-founder of Rock On Rails.
I want to be clear at the outset about the
perspective we are coming from.
We are not an incumbent R provider.
We are a new entrant attempting
to participate in this market for the first time.
That distinction matters because incumbents
and new entrants experience regulatory
ambiguity very differently.
We are a small New Zealand team
of software developers and system builders.
Our goal is to help ensure
that the ruck system evolves into a
competitive innovative market.
Rather than consolidating into a small, small number
of incumbent providers with limited pressure to innovate,
we focus on removing unnecessary technological
and operational barriers
that might block new entrants while keeping regulatory
accountability clear and strong.
I also want to state clearly that we support the bill
and its overall policy direction.
We support the move towards a modern ruck system
with strong oversight and clear accountability.
Our submission is not about opposing the bill,
it is about ensuring it works in practice as intended.
Most discussions around this bill focus on
who is a rut provider
and what are obligations attached to that role.
The issue we want to highlight is the inverse.
The bill does not clearly define
who is excluded from being a rut provider in particular,
it does not clearly state whether rut provider status
applies only to entities that issues licenses and collect
and forward revenue to N ZT A, whether that also
by definition captures any entity that touches ruck revenue
or facilitates transactions somewhere in the supply
chain for a new entrant.
That distinction determines whether the
market is open at all.
If exclusions are not clearly defined, then
by default anyone involved in distribution facilitation
or payment risks being treated as a ruck provider and
therefore would required to be certified.
We have discussed this directly with both NZTA
and the Ministry of Transport.
Those discussions have been constructive.
However, it is fair to say that there is no settled
or consistent interpretation today of
where r responsibility begins
and ends, particularly where it comes to intermediaries,
distributors, and facilitators.
We have been advised that this lack of clarity exists
and that the select committee process is the
appropriate place to resolve this.
Our belief is that r needs to be accessible to everyone,
not just fleets and not just digitally confident users
and needs to be accessible to people like my grandmother,
who is only capable of
and interested in going to a local dairy
to sort things out in person.
If access relies only on a small number
of vertically integrated or digital channels
or companies capable of running the supply chain end to end,
we will unintentionally exclude people
and increase non-compliance,
particularly in rural or older communities.
Local dairies and small retailers are often primary access
point for essential services in New Zealand,
an approved RU provider issues licenses in this scenario
and collects and forwards revenue to NZTA.
That provider then enables through a partnership for RU
to be sold through a local dairy.
The dairy processes the payment,
but does not issue the license, does not set the pricing,
and does not interact with NZTA.
If simply touching the revenue in this scenario
or facilitating the transaction makes the dairy a R
provider, then the dairy must be certified.
This will simply never happen.
So the dairy will not be able to facilitate the purchasing
of ruck, extend that logic across the system.
Local dairies will not sell rock.
Supermarkets will not sell r small retailers
and rural access points will step away.
Only organizations that can compete entirely end to end,
remain viable, remain viable In practice.
That is two to four incumbent providers
with large vertically integrated supply chains.
All New Zealanders are then forced
to use one of those incumbents.
This will not be a competitive market.
It is an oligopoly created by definition, not intent.
I also want to note something briefly this question of
who is explicitly excluded from being a rut provider has not
been raised by incumbents today.
And from our perspective as a new entrant, we understand why
through our fundraising journey
and our discussions with incumbents, investors connected
to incumbents and some aggressive overseas players,
particularly from the United States,
we have repeatedly encountered the expectation
that the industry will be tightly gate capped.
There is a clear assumption that only a small number
of players will be able to operate the R cycle end to end,
and that those players will dominate the market precisely
because others cannot enter.
This is not speculation.
It is an incentive reality we have encountered directly.
We believe though that the fix is straightforward.
We are not asking the committee to redesign the bill
or we can oversight.
We are asking for explicit clarification That rut provide a
status applies to entities that issue RU licenses
and collect and forward revenue to NZTA
and entities that do not perform those core functions are
explicitly excluded from being treated
as RU providers without clear exclusions, we believe
that you will not get a competitive market with them.
We believe you do. Thank you.
I'm happy to take any questions,
Adam. Thank you. That's, that's,
um, very helpful. Uh, questions.
Can I just ask you a little bit more about your,
uh, your business itself?
So, um, yeah, you've actually seen the business you have,
how many people you got involved and
how long have you been going and, and, um, so yeah,
what situation are you in in terms of the ability
to actually provide a service if that was able to be Oh
Yeah, absolutely. So
we've got about, um, a team of five to six people.
We've had some software developers
who have worked in the telematics
industry, um, for several years.
And our goal is essentially
to remove the complexity from building a backend system
that allows you to sell r.
So there's definitely a technical barrier
for people who want to enter the market.
Um, and our ability to execute
that would be reasonably simple.
We have some pretty ad advanced software engineers.
Um, my background comes from the deliveries startup days
where I was involved and we've taken some of the developers,
um, from there as well who sit on our,
our board as advisors.
So we believe that our ability to execute
and remove the barrier for new entrants is strong.
That's very helpful, thank you.
Uh, and any other questions, colleagues? Tangi?
Yes. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, thank you, Adam.
Can you just clarify the, um, extent of,
of the communications
and engagement that you've had with, um, NZTA?
You talked about that being constructive Yeah.
But, uh, being effectively pointed to this process
to seek the clarity that's needed.
Yeah, absolutely. So we have submitted on the RFI
for road user charges, um,
that closes on the 13th of February.
Um, and we ask some very direct questions there.
I I probably won't quote them because they are quite long
and, and would take up a lot of time.
Um, but those ones are publicly available
and the responses we got there do include, uh, direction
to submit on this bill.
Um, so, you know, I'm not sure if there's a way for me to,
to send those to you if you did want to look,
but, uh, yeah, we, we've submitted through that.
We've also had some discussions
with the revenue integrity team from NZTA, just about the,
the possibility of who is included and who is excluded.
Uh, and they have also advised us that, uh,
they couldn't give a straight answer, basically to be blunt
with you, um, around who is excluded.
And they advised us to submit on this as well
Done Tangi.
That's very helpful. I think if you can, um, Adam,
if you can send any material through
that you think is useful as an additional material through
to, um, Jonathan Clark, that would be, um, most appreciated.
And thank you very much for raising, um, uh,
another angle on this.
Okay, perfect. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Okay.
Uh, we've now got Drive electric,
uh, which is Kirsten and Ian.
We've gotten there, Jonathan. Yep.
They should be in those Zoom. Beautiful. Thank you.
And then after that, infrastructure New Zealand
Kto. Can you hear me okay
there,
Andy? Thanks, Kirsten. Yes.
Yep. Brilliant. Yep.
And are you just, just, just you or We got Ian as well,
Uh, Dean, but um,
Dean, I was, I had double E at the beginning of his name.
Oh,
No, no, that's okay.
Okay. Hey, thank you very much, uh,
for making time available.
Uh, we are thrilled to be here.
Uh, for those of you in the select committee that don't know
who Drive Electric is, uh,
we represent over 70 organizations across the e mobility
ecosystem from energy retailers, infrastructure providers,
vehicle importers, and resellers.
Um, so I just wanna put out front, uh,
that the EV sector has got no issues, uh,
with paying a ruck.
We believe every vehicle needs to pay its share.
And when the Minister of Transport at the time, um, Simmy
and Brown introduced rux on EVs in 2024, we were assured
that when the Universal RUX system was introduced,
that it would be a fair and equitable system for EVs
and the sector as a whole.
So we are very excited to see, um, this bill come out and,
and we welcome it.
Um, we support the modernization
of the R system towards a digital led, uh, regime.
Regime. And we believe this is going to simplify things,
it's gonna innovate things
and it will reduce the admin costs.
So, um, from that aspect, um, a big well done, I guess,
uh, for us, we see the impact of government policies
and just the importance of getting it right.
So, and to give you a highlight, the importance in 2023,
um, 27.6%
of EVs sold were electric in this country.
And then we saw a successive, uh, changes
to government policies over two years,
and that reduced them, uh, to around 10%.
So it just shows the importance, um, of these policies.
We've gone from being a leader to a laggard,
and that means financially we are missing out on a massive,
uh, opportunity in this country when you think 86%
of our energy, uh, is renewable.
So today we'd just like to highlight some
of the risks we see, um, that a pure distance
and weight model, uh, would pose to the New Zealand, uh,
transport system in the economy.
And that's highlighted in in our submission,
which I know you've all got.
So I'd just like to spend a couple of minutes just talking
through two, um, particular aspects,
which I know other people have also touched on,
but sorry, I'll touch on them as well.
Um, just look at the, the law of physics here,
that EVs are heavier than ice vehicles
due to their battery density.
So a distance
and weight system will create a technology penalty
and you would inadvertently tax people
for making a clean choice,
and you'd send them a signal to the market, uh,
not to buy EVs.
And, and we've already seen that by the numbers, um,
from 27% down to 10% the impact of policies.
Another aspect
that we are really worried about is the fuel excise duty,
uh, because it acts as a proxy for efficiency.
So if you're driving a gas guzzling SUV,
you pay more at the pump,
and then you are contributing more to,
to the roads than someone that's pay, you know,
driving a small, uh, fuel efficient,
say a aqua or something like that.
So it naturally encourages consumers
to drive more efficient vehicles.
And if we were to move to just a flat ruck system
for all light vehicles,
that market signal vanishes overnight,
and this would be a backward step for fleet efficiency.
And we'd like to recommend respectively recommend
that the committee, uh, considers an efficiency factor
or an environmental tearing within the R system to
maintain these vital incent incentives.
And, and why is it an efficiency standard important?
Um, we feel it's important to signal to Kiwis
and it's important to signal to our international partners
that this is where the country's heading.
And when you think, I know there was a question
before, uh, that came out around, um, the
economics of it when you think this country spends eight
to $9 billion a year importing fossil fuels into this
country, and
that could be spent in other areas of our economy.
We've also got 80% of our exporters are working
with countries and companies with mandatory
or impending climate disclosures.
So reducing our emissions is important
to our trading partners,
and it's also linked to our eu uh,
free trade agreement as well.
And I know that, you know, there's different, um, political,
um, flavors on this and,
and, you know, climate change isn't important
to some parties as it is to others,
but it is really important to trading partners
and it does give the ability
to get more money into our economy than we've currently got.
And we look, when we look globally, you know,
one in four cars are now, uh, electric, uh, um,
in the global, uh, new car sales.
So, you know, we are really falling behind
and having policies that can support fuel efficiency,
put more money in our economy, seems good sense to, to us.
And I guess from the whole automotive sector as well,
we've seen policies flip flop over the last three years.
And it doesn't matter whether you are selling ice
or ev that's cost the automotive sector, you know,
millions and millions of dollars.
So we would just ask for some well thought out, um,
smart, um, ruck policies that are linked to fuel efficiency,
uh, because that's what the whole industry needs as well,
is some consistent smart policies here.
So thanks, uh, for your consideration
and I'd welcome any questions that you've got.
Thank you, Kirsten. Really appreciate that.
We've got just over four minutes left.
Uh, so are there any questions?
Well, can I, can I kick off with one?
And that is, uh, the design.
I mean, obviously we're not gonna design this on the hoof in
terms of, of how our system might work,
but you, you've argued that EVs might get at the moment,
we've, we've, there's, there's no differentiation
between vehicles that, uh, that are
below 3000, uh, kilograms.
So, um, whether it's two and a half thousand or,
or you know, 1200, um, the charge regime is,
is basically the same.
You seem to be arguing that we should be changing that,
but that would adversely affect EVs as generally heavier.
Uh, if you were doing that to, you know, further support,
say smaller, um, I use petrol and diesel rather than ice
because that's got other
pejorative connotations at the moment.
Um, uh, you know, so so how do we manage to get that right
so we don't penalize one end
or other of the, if you like,
desirable vehicles, if that's what you wanna do? Yeah,
Sure. Look, there's
different ways you could do it.
Um, we are not saying no, um,
don't have a weight-based, um, model.
We are saying you could do weight-based with,
with a efficiency measure as well.
And there's different ways you could do it if you,
some people within the sector would like it purely on,
on emissions, where you could do a, a simple model
by engine size as well.
So there's options and depending on,
on your consultation on, on what you'd, uh, like to see.
But, you know, engine size bands could be one way to do it
or otherwise the emission profile of vehicles is, you know,
is another way to do it.
Simon,
Uh, thank you Mr. Chair.
Look,
really understand the issues that your sector is facing,
but isn't it correct that our biggest problem is
that we actually need to essentially double the amount
of revenue we're collecting from road users to pay
for road maintenance, new road construction safety upgrades,
and the current National Land transport fund is anticipated
to collect about $14 billion between 24 and 2027.
It spends 32. So we've gotta find $18 billion somewhere.
So yeah, isn't the point that we're all gonna have
to get used to paying our fair share?
Um, at the moment it might not be tweaked perfectly,
but we're gonna have to pay more, right?
Yeah, look, absolutely.
And, and you're not going to be able to change that at all.
You know, road costs are going to increase
with climate change and, and we will see, you know, more
and more of extreme weather events,
which will dismantle our roads.
So, you know, I would hope particularly
for our export customers, which are dealing in markets that,
um, are looking to see us decarbonize that we would send
and, and make a solid attempt at actually de decarbonizing
and transport offers our best route to do that.
So if you think we,
we spend $10.5 billion a year on, um, social
hospital admissions directly related to our transport
emissions, we spend eight
to $9 billion a year importing fossil fuel.
So look, over the next 10 years, we could have
over a hundred, um, billion back in our economy if,
if we actually decarbonized.
And that's not, um, putting into, um,
taking into account at all, uh, our trading partners
and what, as a small export nation, um, we are reliant and,
and I personally wouldn't wanna jeopardize the
EU free trade agreement.
Um, and at the moment when you see the,
our major trading partners, you know, decarbonizing,
I appreciate that the US has dropped off,
but in the eu, um, they certainly haven't.
And we are seeing one in four cars now sold
globally are electric.
It was, um, one in five in 2024.
We are seeing that, that, uh, this is
where other economies are heading.
And when you've got 86% renewable energy in this country,
it makes economic sense, put the environment out of it,
but it makes economic sense.
So there's going to, you know, have to be other money, um,
made available and, you know, that's over a,
a a hundred billion that we could have in the next 10 years
if we were actually serious about decarbonizing
our transport sector.
Thanks, Kirsten. Our time is
up, so we really appreciate that. Thank you very much.
Oh, no, thanks for your time. Have a
good day. Thank you. Yeah,
Great day.
Cheers. Uh, infrastructure New Zealand.
Nick
got Nick there,
Can Oh, you can see me Good, Nick?
Yep. We can see, you can hear you.
Um, you know, the usual drill,
we've got you there for 10 minutes.
Um, take your, take your submission as read,
uh, bits you wanna highlight.
That's great. Uh, I'll give you a yell with four minutes
to go if you're still presenting, um, just
to ideally leave some time for, um, questions.
And, uh, your time starts now.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, um, to members of the committee.
Um, and thanks for the chance to appear, uh, today.
Look, we support the direction
of the land Transport Revenue Amendment bill,
and, um, I want to spend my time on behalf
of Infrastructure New Zealand here today.
Less on the technical detail and more on why it matters
and why it matters now,
and where we are heading to where we think we are heading to
with a road pricing.
Um, it its core.
Our view is the, the bill is not just about
tolling or road charges.
It's about whether New Zealand is prepared to,
to take a grown up step towards a modern, fair
and durable way of funding, uh, one
of our most critical national assets.
And that's our, that's our roading network.
Um, and I wanna sort of start with
that very simple proposition.
Um, if we can't agree on the end point, uh,
even if our motivations, um,
or if we can't agree on the end point,
should I say even if our motivations
for doing it differ, we should seize it.
Because across Parliament, I know
that there are many different reasons for supporting change
to this legislation.
Some, some people care about managing congestion,
some care about emissions,
some care about fiscal sustainability
and, and asset discipline.
Uh, and, and many are con concerned about fairness.
I think, of course, many of us are interested in all
of those things in combination as we should be.
Um, but I think if the shared destination is a system
where people pay for the road that they consume,
whether it's by car or bus
or truck, then we should be able
to move forward together deliberately and with confidence.
And I think this, this, um, amendment really is a, is a,
is a re is an important step to signal that
because user pays, road charging, um, isn't radical.
Um, and it is inevitable as we seek to properly fund
our roading, uh, assets
and our roading network For over a century,
I think we've relied on fuel excise as a proxy for road use.
And that link, as we know, is now breaking down
with electric vehicles and hybrids and other fuel efficiency
and alternative fuels.
Um, they're actually already here.
So if we don't modernize now,
we're just gonna continue this drift into a system that
is unfair and opaque and,
and as we know, financially unsustainable.
So the bill begins the transition towards something better,
but it is just a start, uh, charging people
for the road they actually used when they use it,
and where they use it is
fundamentally more honest than the system we've got today.
And crucially, we've now got the technology to do
that properly.
Digital road user charging allows pricing
to become more than just revenue collection.
It allows it to shape behavior congestion.
Charging is not about punishment.
It is about giving people a choice about when they travel,
um, and to be able to better recognize the true cost
of providing the asset.
It allows people to, if they choose,
change their travel time, their mode,
their route, or their frequency.
And it makes the real cost
of congestion visible and avoidable.
And that delivers benefits to revenue,
but beyond just revenue,
because it can reduce congestion, um,
it can improve our productivity as a nation
and lower emissions
and it uses existing assets more efficiently, um,
before we just default to building more.
And that's in the view of infrastructure,
new Zealand's smart infrastructure policy.
Um, but there is also that second principle
that matters just as much.
And that's one, um, that New Zealand
has been historically quite horrid applying.
And that is that money generated from an asset should be
reinvested in or close to an asset, um, funding roads
or alternative routes.
Um, I don't need
to tell anyone on the select committee today
that roads are not free.
Um, they deteriorate.
They require renewal and they carry long-term maintenance
and capital costs.
Yet over successive cycles of government, we have continued
to underinvest in maintaining our roading.
Network asset management isn't exciting, um,
but the consequences of our collective neglect
as a country are very real and they're very expensive.
So a clearer user,
user pays framework does bring something pretty powerful
because it creates transparencies transparency.
And I think that citizens can see what is being collected
and where it is being applied.
People can see, uh, where money is invested
and where subsidies exist, so they become more explicit.
And that isn't a problem because in some cases
subsidies can be justified.
They happen all the time, but they should be visible,
they should be debated, and they should be intentional, um,
in a, in a, because they're often hidden and,
and obscured in a system, uh,
that, that we have at the moment.
And over time, this approach enables far more
straightforward conversations about funding
and financing and regulation.
It does introduce some discipline
and it's better supports from our perspective,
long-term planning by aligning incentives around maintaining
and renewing, uh, not just building new stuff.
Um, importantly, just over four minutes. Okay. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, importantly, we see this bill, uh,
as an, as a as the start of something, as an introduction,
but not as the end state
that we need to get to as a country.
Because initially revenue may be derived from specific roads
or corridors that is sensible.
It allows the system to build public confidence
and capability.
But the direction of travel should be very clear.
Every vehicle, every road, every part of the country,
a universal technology enabled user pay system
with dynamic pricing implemented carefully and transparency.
That's why the start is important,
but that's where this country should be heading,
and we should be doing that sooner rather than later.
Um, equity matters here.
Rural communities, lower income households
and people without alternatives must also be considered.
That's why reinve reinvest, uh,
exceptions pricing design
and complimentary public transport investment
are also critical.
Um, but equity is not best served by clinging
to a broken system that fails and will continue to fail.
Uh, people are far more in the long run.
So just finally, I wanna emphasize the importance
of bipartisanship.
I know that you'll be sick of ourselves
and others talking about this, but not at all.
Transport, transport infrastructure lasts decades
and funding systems have to last even longer.
If this, uh, reform is to endure,
it must survive electoral cycles.
Um, and that means a clarity of purpose, transparency in,
in the implementation
and that shared commitment to the end goal.
Um, so a step in the right direction.
Um, it modernizes how we charge for roads
and it strengthens the link between use and investment.
Um, I think just lastly, the one thing I would say is that,
uh, when any road is told it's gonna require strong
communication, better communication perhaps,
than we've historically been known for, uh, to users
and the wider community about what and why it's being done.
We know this won't be popular to begin with.
We respect the fact that people, uh, in
economically challenged times are gonna react to
that even more strongly.
But we do have to explain why it's important.
And, uh, I think our view is
that once motorists see the benefits
of potentially reduced congestion, additional investment,
and with more transparent, uh, uh, maintenance
and renewal, um, what we've seen internationally is
that support grows quite quickly.
So we do have to be, uh, not only bold,
but also brave in this implementation.
And so we, we would encourage the committee
to see this legislation is not just, uh, an amendment,
but as a foundation to a fairer
and more disciplined system that's fit for the future
that is essentially already upon us.
Um, I, we've got a minute left. I wanna ask a question.
I'm gonna give tangy your first one
and I will, I will go minute if
so over on this one. Tangy. Uh,
Thanks Mr. Chair.
Um, thanks Nick.
Can I just pick up on the disproportionate impact on
vulnerable groups that you've touched on
and your submission refers to, um, transport, poverty?
Uh, are you talking about in terms of the need
for reinvestment in active transport, public transport,
wider transportation infrastructure that at a,
a wholesale sort of level by government?
Or are you talking about revenue generated from schemes like
this to take into account perhaps some of that going in, in
that particular direction?
Well, it, it could be both.
I, I think what we're saying is that choice should exist
for whether somebody has a, a high income or a low income.
And we wanna see, uh, we know
that choice is the best way across the transport system.
Multimodal choice is a very good way of reducing congestion,
but also, uh, giving people the reliability they need
to be able to power their lives and their livelihoods.
So, um, but we also don't think that the discussion around,
um, ensuring that low income people have access to roads,
told roads in this case, um, we don't think
that should be the thing that stops this legislation
that should be designed, uh, alongside, um,
because this is a policy, this is the right policy
for where the country is heading.
Um, we just need adjunct policies that ensure
that people have can, you know, have access to, um,
whether it's road or public transport along the way.
Great, thanks. Quick, quick question from me.
Um, Nick, if you, um, if you look at
what you're arguing at the moment in the local roading area,
of course, basically roughly up to half
of the cost is actually not paid by road users at all.
It's paid by people called rate payers.
Um, so there's obviously a question there.
The second one is the argument you're making around, um,
you know, road a gen, lots
of traffic generates lots of money.
Um, road B rural area, I know you mentioned rural area,
um, generates very little money.
It's very similar to what Morris Williamson was
articulating probably 25 years ago.
Um, and you, you'd look, you look at this
and say, what, what does this do to the rural networks?
Um, if you like the fingers rather than the hands and the,
and the body, um, you know,
do they actually start becoming less
and less viable? So two
Questions. Well, it's a
good question. The first thing I would say
about rural roading networks is they have these things
called, um, heavy trucks
that pay a lot in road user charges.
So I'm not, I I'm, I think we will see
with a more transparent system, roads as, uh, economic,
as an economic network far more transparently.
And that is where either fairer charging
or more transparent cross-subsidization will happen.
And I'm not actually singling, um, rural roads out there,
but across the country at the moment,
money gets spent on our owning net.
We actually don't know where the sort of, we can guess
where the ups and the downs are in terms of subsidy.
But what we are heading to in terms of a
full electronic road user charge system is we will be able
to see, um, the, the revenue generated from each road.
And that will mean that some roads are, you know,
some people are subsidized,
but that's essentially why you've got a system.
But it also means that you've got an ability
to over time, influence behavior
And time-wise rates.
Say that again. Rates local roads, basically up to half
of them is paid for by somebody
that's not a transport user at all.
That's, that's right, exactly.
And well that, and that's the system.
As the system evolves, that has to be designed.
And that's actually about,
that's the onus on a better relationship
between local and central government.
Uh, that's not something I can solve,
I suspect it's not something you can solve.
But as, as, uh, technology evolves, um,
that connection, I mean there is, uh, already heavy,
heavy subsidies through, um, the far rate by, from central
to local government, um, that
that will essentially be the mechanism for how, um,
discussion happens around where, how subsidy continues,
Who subsidizes who is a moot point.
But anyway, we, we'll need to move on. Nick.
Thank you very much. Really appreciate it.
Alright, thank you. Cool. Cool. Okay.
And now we have the National Road Carriers Association.
We've got James.
James, welcome. Yes. Uh,
Briefing. So, and good
afternoon,
We've got you, we've got you down for 10 minutes.
Um, I'll give you a call with Forti Go.
Um, and we do like to ask questions as you, um, observe.
Yep. Uh, and, um, time is yours.
Greetings. Well, good afternoon,
and first of all, thanks for, um, the invitation to, uh,
speak at this National Road Carriers has a very long history
of supporting, uh, tolling
and also for supporting, uh, fair, uh, charging,
uh, for, for use.
Um, so we've got, um, full support of the intent
of this bill, and we only have two main concerns with it.
So first of all is the absence of a mandatory, uh,
upper limit for, uh, for, for the tolling.
And then the second, uh, objection is the, uh, proposed
to restrict heavy vehicles from, uh, not, uh,
using a alternative for using alternate roads.
So if I just go to the, the first ob um, objection,
which is the, um, the to tolling is, it doesn't have a,
a mechanism for setting the maximum price.
I think that's probably, uh, needed to, to, for clarity.
Uh, and it should actually be a function of the legislation
that the tolling, um, so to prevent it becoming a mechanism
for a, for extracting, uh, unconstrained revenue,
uh, from, from users.
So it would, uh,
you'd get far greater support if there was actually
a, a defined mechanism.
And I think, uh, colleagues earlier mentioned, uh,
three times, uh, the light vehicle rate for trucks seems
to be a appropriate thing to put in there.
Uh, so because of course, the other thing to mention is
that all costs just transfer through to the supply chain.
So, um, we wanna make sure the costing, um,
the rates are fair.
Um, so the second one is the, um, ability for,
um, the, to use alternate routes
or, uh, other than toll roads.
Now we, we feel that if the,
if the toll road is actually constructed, um,
and designed correctly, you're gonna get, um,
people using it by default, right?
So you are, you're, you're effectively gonna achieve the
same outcome if you build a good, a decent,
uh, alternate road.
Um, so the need to mandate isn't actually there.
And there are options, there are occasions where a,
where a heavy vehicle may actually need to, um, you know,
not use a toll road.
So in case of, um, uh, servicing
or, um, you know, even something as simple as driver swaps
and things like that, or taking a rest break.
So we, you know, you don't want to have to be applying for,
um, ministerial exemptions every time you need
to, uh, change a tire.
So, um, I think, you know,
if you build the road appropriately, uh,
and we have seen that already with the existing toll roads,
our members have, uh, you know, been, uh,
taking advantage of, of the existing toll roads.
Uh, and we have seen that.
So I don't think that the need
to mandate is actually required in the legislation.
Now, I'm happy to take questions from anyone.
Okay. Look, thank you very much, uh, uh, for that James,
uh, questions Tangi?
Yeah, thank you, Mr. Chair. Thanks.
Um, James, good to see you again.
Um, can you just share with me your thoughts
around the bo the base toll amounts via the tolling order?
I get the, um, the sort of upper limit point
that you've made as, as a discretionary consideration,
not a mandatory one.
Um, and you're calling for the latter, I get that,
but in terms of the, the ministerial consideration of
what is a benefit and what's not,
there are three criteria there.
Does the association have a particular, um, perspective
or view on, on what should be fundamentals when it comes
to the base toll sort of commitments?
Yeah, the, the, the base fundamental is productivity.
So if the, if the toll road is going to deliver
a more productive, um, route,
and the pro productivity can be either a time saving
or the ability to, um, carry, um,
additional mass is a good, good example.
So Toll Road may have a higher mass limit than the
alternate, then that is gonna
outweigh the cost of the toll.
And we see that already with the existing toll road.
So having run a fleet of trucks, um, you know, when we,
we would look, okay, are we gonna use the northern gateway
toll road or are we gonna continue to go up through,
you know, over, uh, it was an absolute no brainer, right?
It was an absolute no brainer.
You go up the toll road, right?
You get a, you get a, um, a time saving that matches, uh,
what the additional costs you're doing.
So you're not, you don't have to then start saying, okay,
we're gonna start on charging toll costs
because you're, you're getting a, a net, a net benefit.
So that would be the point where it's, uh,
you know, fair and reasonable.
Okay, Tony? So the question I asked on this one, um,
when we had an earlier submitter, um, James, is that, um,
surely the best way of doing this would simply be
to say you choose which routes you're going to choose.
Um, you know, you could decide which route's faster
or, uh, uh, you know, toll or no toll.
Um, but if there are some road routes that, you know, the,
the road controlling authority, whether it's the NCTA or a
or a council, um, is concerned about,
does not want heavy trucks on, then it says so,
and it says, well, we'll, we'll, you know, we'll put a bylaw
and say that, you know, there's, there's a weight limit
or whatever else it might be on a particular route
and that guides you rather than having a blanket.
'cause I mean, we don't actually have
that many toll roads at the moment anyway.
Yeah. Um, so, um, yeah, it's gonna be challenging.
Yeah, absolutely Andy, and,
and the fact is,
there's already mechanism in place now you can
post a bridge, right?
If you, if your structure's got a, got a concern on it,
you can, uh, put in a, uh, as you say,
a bylaw if it's a local road.
So there's already provisions in there, uh,
but they, those provisions have to be justified, right?
Rather than just a blanket, uh, Ben
Yeah, that, that makes sense.
Appreciate that. Any other questions?
I don't see any, so that's very clear. Thank you very much.
Really appreciate that James.
And, uh, enjoy the rest of the day.
You too. Thank you. Okay, we've got, uh,
two individual submitters to, um,
wrap up with Michael Morris. It's Michael on,
Uh, no, it's kind of Michael,
but we do have John ready to go.
Okay. Well we will go with John then.
So it's, uh, Dr. John McDonald, worry.
John, you there?
Yep. Uh, is audio working?
Yep, we are in your hands.
I'll give you a call with, uh,
about a minute and a half to go.
Okay. Just if you want to leave time for questions.
Alright. KiOR, um, I'm opposed to this bill.
Um, I will read out
a quick excerpt from a New Zealand initiative report from
2024,
which I think encapsulates what's at stake even though I
disagree with the direction of travel.
So to quote, uh, Matthew hel
perhaps the greatest challenge will be
won of political will.
Moving to a comprehensive road pricing model will require
firm leadership and a willingness to champion a policy
that while in the long term public interest may be initially
unpopular, it will require a sustained effort
to shift the public narrative
to challenge long held assumptions about the right to travel
and build a shared understanding of the need for change.
So I disagree with the long-term public interest part of
that, but otherwise that
encompasses what we are dealing with.
This is part of a larger program along with the time
of use charging bill to remove, um,
what the public understands is their right to travel
and replace it with a paper journey system
of travel privileges.
Um, which on one hand is gonna be about extracting revenue,
and on the other hand offers scope for those privileges
to be revoked at the whim of potentially the government
or at the whim of commercial providers.
Uh, the long-term public interest is complicated
by the enthusiasm for public private partnerships,
both in the electronic
and digital systems to, um, manage
road pricing systems, um, with a number of private providers
for profit entities in that space,
but also on the roads themselves.
And I've talked in here about potentially
this bill could be used to hand over
existing roads which have been brought
and paid for potentially the land has been seized
or gifted as a public right of way,
and it could be potentially vested in private
and overseas interests, um,
to create toll roads from existing roads and 49 year leases.
We are resistant to New Zealand to privatization
of roads and bridges.
Um, but there are more sneaky ways
where it's effectively privatization for private benefit
of a public asset, um, which doesn't quite, um,
meet the definition of a full scale
privatization of an asset.
Um, yeah, so we're replacing the right for freedom
of movement in this bill, um, to having a subscribe
for, for service system through a commercial service.
Um, people could be disconnected or denied that service.
There may be terms of conditions they're unwilling to agree
to, to subscribe for an Iraq system.
They could potentially be de banked
or get on the wrong side of PayPal
and have your ability to access travel restricted
because the commercial providers, um, largely go
through similar payment systems
and there may not be an alternative option.
So we should be able to go down to an NZTA
office, um,
and, uh,
get these road user charges directly from them without
having to go through a commercial intermediate.
Uh, I think I can take the rest of my submission
as read. Um,
That'd be great. We've got about
a minute and a bit to, um,
to ask questions then, John.
Right. Are there any questions?
Well, John, can I just ask, ask you one, um,
because at the moment you talked essentially about the, um,
removal of the right to travel or freedom of movement.
Um, well of course that exists at the moment,
but at the moment we have a, um, an actual that you have
to pay, um, access to the roading system.
Uh, you know, you don't, if you're walking, you don't,
if you're biking, but you do for all other, um, forms
of transport, you just pay it through either a ruck
or a, um, or, or fed what changes in this,
It changes because it's going
to be a quite intimate moment by Mona monitoring
by the state or their corporate partners.
Yeah. And it is leading the way to potentially denial
of specific journeys.
So one of the scenarios I anticipate is protest activity.
The government or maybe even the commercial provider,
decides that your travel on this given day is going
to a protest activity they don't agree with.
And it could be on a range of different issues.
And I'm not gonna pick sides on those issues,
but the potentially exists for the government and that,
or the commercial provider to decide
that your travel on this day is going to a protest
that they don't agree with
or don't wanna be associated with.
And then they'll deny you those travel privileges
or slap a penalty on that.
Yes, you can drive to that protest,
but it's gonna cost you a $200 penalty fee
because they decide they don't want it.
And as is an instruction, New Zealand has talked about,
and a number of other think tanks left,
right center talk about is
that this gives quite explicitly levers
for control of a population.
So it gives them tools
to manage a population on an intimate basis.
Um, and that could be for a variety
of different policy reasons that large chunks
of the population don't agree with.
And it could be under the guise of economic efficiency
or climate change or, uh, ethnicity.
We've seen the
Ion. I think we, I think, I think we're,
I think we're clearly John
With manoa based, um, exemptions.
So there's a range of different political groups
and political causes, which once they get these levers
and fine detail monitoring, they can potentially,
Uh, John, I Think, I think make travel
more difficult, more expensive.
I think we're very, we're very clear, John,
on, on what you're arguing.
Um, thank you. And we, we have had the issues raised
around privacy, e, et cetera.
So that's, um, thank you for raising that as well.
Really appreciate it. Thank you, um, colleagues that, uh,
brings us to the end of the morning submissions.
Um, and we are due back at two o'clock.
Um, so we'll see you.